this is a unified framework attempt, that uses geomter, dimensonal embedding, superpermuations, number/graph/information theory and other concepts to attempt to demonstrate and prove the following as a baseline function, and derive all claims therein: 

provided access to a contained dataset, or connected via mechanisms allowing data to be held and manipulated as needed, the in defined and described algebraic system will be able to tokenize, organize, and re deliver in the best possible organization of that data as related to any number of defined and provided contextual filters.

the entire system is governed by its own geometry of the embedded data, and many very specific rules, and equations, to control the movement and transformation of said tokens. 

the focus is on prime/coprime relationships as "gates" or possibly similar to "knots", and the distinct unique interactions that occur when base/mod alignment and prime/coprime interactions occur.

there is a single master formula that can be used to determine all lower work needs, and many specific formula to further manage that data so that, at any time, amonst all interior data, you can examin any embedding in up to 8 distinct contxets at any time, and track all interior data locations, and all valid layouts possible to obtain next and obtained prior.

the system tracks and accounts for entropy at all times, and manages it via Ramanujan's explicit formula, and other rule based understanding of ordering that reduces overall entropy loads.

the system is defined as such, as it pertains to data.

NOTE: ALL INFORMATION IN THIS SYSTEM IS TREATED OF EITHER A SINGLE SUPERPERMUTATION OF ALL LOWER SUPERPERMUTATIONS OF ITS INCLUSIONS AND THEIRS ETC ETC(YOU MUST INCLUDE ALL ENTROPY COSTS) OR A SET OF DATUM INSIDE ANY ONE OF THOSE SUPERPERMUTATIONS, OR ANY STAGE INBETWEEN THAT(THERE ARE METHODS DESCRIBED)

n=1- 1, base, primative, the undeniable in the system. if something is n=1, there is nothing internal or external that can change what these tokens mean.

n=2 - 121 - merging and accepting two parity based options for advancement(also understanding that there are 8 other lanes into other data spaces to consider here, but not always used), this is a duality, either created via inversion/invariants, or naturally via parity, always needs a 3rd to become anything more than base level interpretation of two items(this is like your peek ahead methods to view documents AI use noramlly

n=3 - 123121321 - notice the 121 from before now has a 3(123)(1))21) between it, this was either a combination from other areas or a direct accpetance from the adjecent primatives. you will notice patterns like this all over the system, they are not flukes. they point out the rules and the actual playbook of the best legal moves local into global. this is your triadic state. three items that share both meaning to context, and have a way to manage excess entropy. you can define as many of these states as you like, they are the structure of all higher states.

n=4 - 123412314231243121342132413214321 - this is your global map. if you have this string. you can extend the process to n=x almost indefinatly(as far as ive found) all other strings can be derived from this string via forced invariance and parity duality. this is the quadratic rest state, containing 4 primative, law like datum that you cannot disprove, and are all in allignment with higher layers.

this is the largest actual dataset you ever have to hold in this system. it is very helpful to have more, as that save time later, but to achieve a full n=8 solve, everything you need is present.

you simply use 8 copies of the 4 sequences, and shift by single steps until you can solve for 5 as a palindromic superpermutation, and continue in this manner. this is as close to brute force as this system gets.

alternatively, you can leverage geometry and embedded dimensonal space.

if you simulate to the equivialnt of up to 10 degrees of seperation higher than your desired layer, and then examine the geometry of the lower layers, the connections that are not obvious at lower layers stand out, and allow you to plot those points to reorder your solve.

the system ALLOWS most states to reseolve into a higher superpermutation but does not require it.

if done with tokens and meaning, you can derive vast meaning spaces from very basic understanding by plotting it first as embedded data, and only spot checking what you need to understand more of.
